the
question that occurred to me earlier but it was not
an appropriate time to ask it but I'll ask it now you
mentioned that connection with Dr. Hopkins. He
had brought, he caused you to come from one place to
another, and I've forgotten now where that was. I
think maybe he pulled you down to the project at
Grand Isle. Yes. You see, when Project 9 was set up,
he was the director of the whole business. The
Grand Isle area was not the only area we had. We had
researches going on here, at Texas Christian
University, at the University of Texas, in South
Carolina at one of the laboratories, at LSU. Well,
I think you mentioned that you and Dr. Hopkins had
both studied under the same man at Illinois. Were
you there at the same time? Yes. So you had known
each other as graduates? Oh yes, I knew him up there
quite well. And
so we also, he
came to the Virginia Fisher's Laboratory,
College of William & Mary, just a few months after I
took over that research job. So we worked together
over there, you see, for a whole year. He was
working mostly in the crustacean
area. There's shrimp, blue crabs, and that area. I
was working in the oyster research area, but we
were together there also. We've never lost touch
with each other since about 19 and well back in the
20s here. Well, I thought that's probably what the
connection was, but I want to clarify that.
Other than the two big projects, 9 and 13, about
which we have talked, what is some of your other
significant research projects that you've been
involved in?
Well, my earliest research is, I deserted the,
after getting my PhD.
I had problems when I got to this college in
Oklahoma, so far as the library was concerned, and
I couldn't get together enough library to do
research in the parasitology area. So I shifted to
the freshwater crustacea, and Some of the best
work was back there in the early days. With the
freshwater crustacea, I studied cave fauna all
over the United States, and described many
species of freshwater crustaceans, and the
isopods, amphipods, and these groups, studied
plankton and things of this sort. This was the
reason the University of Oklahoma hired me
because they knew of my work in this area. They
hired me for a completely different thing.
From what I've been doing, I started with Dr.
Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. There are two sets of people in
the United States that know me. One of them knows me
from my work in the crustacean and the freshwater
biology area.
The other knows me from my work in pollution.
Completely separate.
One of my students came in one day and said, Doc, I
hear you're dead. What do you mean I'm dead? He
said, well, I was at a meeting over here, and a guy
from the University of Texas,
and he was studying cave farming. He said, I told
this that I was working under Dr. Mackin, and he
said, oh no, Dr. Mackin is one of the old timers who
worked in the first part of the century, and he's
been dead a long time.
So there are two sets of people. Now, one of the
significant things that came out of it early in
business Dr. Henry Baldwin Ward was also a
freshwater biologist as well as a
parasitologist, and he edited the first edition
of Ward and Whipple's Freshwater Biology, which
is a classic, in the taxonomy of the freshwater
forms in the United States. That one came out in
1918. It was one of my Bibles before I ever saw Henry
B. Ward. Then,
and it helped to take me to the University of
Illinois. I liked that area as well as
Christology.
Later on, after Dr. Ward's death, this volume was
completely revised and re- issued somewhere in
the early 60s after I was here and I authored one of
the chapters in the book and the crustacean area
and it is studied with my species that I've
described so I'm sort of proud of that book and that
volume which I helped put together because it is an
aggregation of people who are the tops in their
line in that freshwater biology area In
fact, I like that work just as well as I do the rest of
it. There is a peculiar phase of my work at the
present time, and it grew as I developed. much of
the work that I did for the oil companies I did
through their legal departments. Sometimes it
wasn't, but sometimes it was. Sometimes lawsuits
came up and I began to develop the knowledge of
legal affairs.
And much of my work now has to do with the legal
aspects of oil pollution, and in some cases have
been hired directly to advise attorneys in the
matter of oil pollution, what it does, what it does
not do, and analyses or reports, things of this
sort. This probably shouldn't be in this main
part. It is a complete sideline. But it's been a
great advantage to me because I get to know a
profession. which is completely different,
differently oriented from the scientists and
academic scientists, people who have never been
in the academic area at all, and they're totally
engrossed in the adversary type of litigation,
all of it civil litigation, of course.
This...
After I retired, This part of the thing almost took
over, or did in a number of cases. I have three cases
coming up in the next two months,
I've just finished one. Now, some of the most
interesting work I have done since I retired has
been in the oil spill area. This took over with
first the Torrey Canyon and then the Santa Barbara
spills, and this is something I had been doing for a
quarter of a century. but nobody paid any
attention. I even wrote papers on it, published
them, but nobody ever paid any attention to them
because oil spills were common. But after these
two big spills, the whole nation became oil
conscious and spill conscious. So I have picked up
a number of
studies, worked out a number of studies. The chief
one of these was the Chevron OS bill, where we spent
more money probably than we did in Project 9. This
study is completed and there were enormous
amounts of money tied up in it, 130 some odd million
in suits originally. These were all settled out of
court. They were settled, not out of court, but in
favor of Shervin. Shervin got the decisions
completely in there. I did two of these for
Shervin, the big one and then there was a little one
along the side that I was carrying that nobody ever
heard of, but me and the rest of them. This was a big
one. We have now, we're getting ready to publish
these data. I have a copy now in there for review.
Another big spill was the Tampa spill. There was
one in Tampa Bay and I worked for Exxon on that one
and spent a good part of the year on that and trained
two or three good graduate students on it. Then the
last one, which is just now being settled, was in
Maine, in Casco Bay. This is the city of Portland.
And this one has been finished, and the report has
been written,
but not distributed. This one also will be
published pretty soon, I'm sure. This one will be
settled out of court. What exactly is your role in
these investigations? Now, all of these
investigations will go about it about like this.
The first part of it is simply a matter of
determining what damage is done by the oil spill.
When I know what damage is done in the oil spill,
then I can tell these people what I think they're
liable to. For example, in the one in Casco Bay, a
great lot of oil got in the under tidal zone, and it
did considerable damage. especially in one
thickly populated island, a rocky island there.
So, when we get to this point, we then give them what
we think is an assessment of damage. We, of course,
always have some parcels, and it would be
important.
After that, I'm usually asked to
to help develop the legal end of it, the defense
there is to be. In the case of the Shervin's bill,
both Shervin's bills, and this Castle Bay's bill,
there will be no court proceedings, I'm sure,
because the settlement is made in the one case
against Shervin. Shervin won the case outright
without going to court, without any concession.
In the other case, they did make concessions, but
the federal government is going to have to take the
rap through a purely coincidental avenue. Their
Coast Guard moved some buoys without giving the
proper notice, and this boat hit the rocks because
of the damn buoys
it went through. over a year to establish that. I
mean, the lawyers were working on it. Finally,
they did get it established. Of course, the case
collapsed at that point, but we were prepared in
that case for a settlement. We had got it down to
about two or three million dollars, which I
thought was reasonable for this intertidal zone
damage, which was extensive in a very highly
populated area, all of which scores with very
valuable property all the way around. So it's
probably your principal function then is an
assessment of the damage done by this bill. That's
right. This is the first thing we do, and we never
let anything get in our way until we've made up our
minds. what that is. Then when we get through that,
we'll help them with the legal force of time, if
they want it. How do you go about assessing the
damage? Do you test the water, the content of the
oil in it? Oh, we have very complicated methods. We
measure the oil content everywhere. We use the gas
chromatographic method and untied pretty
closely in this to a New Orleans firm,
a biologically oriented firm. We have an
excellent chemist and all of the equipment. So we
measure the oil content everywhere that it seems
reasonable to do so. And we measure the biological
communities
in the intertidal zone and in the bottom plankton
and everything else. And we have methods even
running into mathematical analyses which will
measure the damage done. To go into these, beyond
this, would be almost impossible. In fact, I'd be
sitting here next week. I went into all of it.
That's the gist of what we do.
You don't get into the tremendous efforts that
have been made to contain the oil once it's spilled
or to avoid spills and that sort of thing. Well, I
get into that a little bit. You mean the
containment of the spill.
I have some strong ideas on that, but I'm not an
engineer. This really belongs to the engineers.
and I pretty well let them have it when I can, but I do
have some strong ideas on it, and I also have some
real good studies on the detergents which are used
in cleanup and things of this sort. These always
play a part in all of the studies. detergents and
cleanup of the spill, not cleaning the inside of
the tank or something? Well, take, for example,
the Shervin spill. When they were trying to put
that fire out, that big platform caught on fire and
burned for weeks, and then when they were working
on the thing, trying to cap these wells, about
seven or eight of them on one platform, They use
detergents to keep the oil washed off the thing
because it's a fire hazard to the firefighters.
This is Red Adair's group working on it. They use
these detergents and these detergents are pretty
highly toxic. Ten times more than oil is. Oil is
only very slightly toxic. But these detergents
and some of the other chemicals that they use are
highly toxic. toxic we believe that there was
actually some damage under the platform by these
detergents in the case of this spill over there
although we can't actually be sure of it the data do
show it this is as far as we went was confined to the
center field of the platform and didn't get
anywhere else and so all kinds of collateral
problems of this My idea is that what they should do
in a spill at sea is to use a suction dredge and sink
all of that oil with silt onto the bottom. And the
reason for that is that we have never found
anywhere in the world where the bottom fauna in an
offshore situation has ever been damaged, no
matter how much oil gets down. We found a lot of oil
from Chevron was incorporated in the mud in the
bottom, but there was no damage there. There are
technical reasons for that, bearing upon the
solubility of various fractions of oil and on the
volatility of various fractions of oil,
things of this sort. and the toxic fractions are
the ones which are most soluble and
which will evaporate, like benzene, xylene, and
these fractions. They are lost into the
atmosphere very rapidly.
24 hours is usually sufficient. In other words,
when the oil gets on the water, you lose
practically all of the toxic fractions. It's only
when this oil goes into the intertidal zone where
it does real damage, and depending upon where you
are and what you do about that intertidal zone and
how you clean it up, damage may be extensive. This
was true in the Torrey Canyon spill where they used
highly toxic
surfactants to clean the beach, as well as other
methods of cleaning, like bulldozing and things
of this sort. So, you have to take all of these
things into consideration.
All of the
methods depend upon where you are, what kind of,
how close to The land, the spill is, all of these
things play a part in
it. I shouldn't have got off on that, but a good part
of my work recently has been on that area.